# chiles-pipeline
README for CHILES Pipeline
Feburary 9, 2016
Version 0.11

Currently, the pipeline can be run in Socorro with the code (below) at /lustre/aoc/projects/chiles/chiles_pipeline, and it has been updated to run on CASA 4.5.  The only major change between 4.4 and 4.5 is that "setjy" no longer requires "usescratch=True" in CASA 4.5.  If you want to run this code in CASA 4.4, you must change that setting as well.

The code in the new pipeline is based on the modified EVLA pipeline that was used to reduce the CHILES data in 2013 and simplified code that Ximena wrote to do bandpass calibration.  Unlike the EVLA pipeline, it is designed to run in a modular fashion with a person examining the output after each module is complete.  At present the pipeline consists of four modules:
	1.	CHILES_pipeline_initial.py
	2.	CHILES_pipe_bandpass.py
	3.	CHILES_pipe_phasecal.py
	4.	CHILES_pipe_target.py
In the future an additional module will be added to make quick spectral line cubes of the resulting data for verification that everything is okay.

In addition to these modules, there are some more Python scripts that are used when running the pipeline:
	1.	CHILES_pipe_startup.py
	2.	CHILES_pipe_restore.py
	3.	EVLA_functions.py
	4.	lib_EVLApipeutils.py
Plus there is CHILES_pipe_restore.list, which contains the list of variables used by the pipeline, and flagcmd_clip_target.txt, which contains the flagging commands to clip the target data.
All eight of the Python CASA scripts are described in more detail below.

To run the pipeline: To run the pipeline, just start by running CHILES_pipeline_initial.py, which only needs to be run once from the directory which contains the data to be reduced. The CASA command is > execfile('/path/CHILES_pipeline_initial.py') where "path" is the full path for the pipeline code. Similar instances of execfile are used to run subsequent modules.  It should be possible to re-run any module multiple times without needing to do anything special.

If you quit CASA in between running modules, then you need to restore the pipeline state by running > execfile('/path/CHILES_pipe_restore.py') before you run the next module.

Detailed description of CHILES pipeline scripts:

	•	CHILES_pipeline_initial.py: This script does all of the pipeline setup and those tasks that do not need to be repeated or lack user input.  It begins by defining the path for the pipeline and the location of the weblogs from the EVLA continuum pipeline that is automatically run on all data.  It sets up the CASA log and the timing log and then runs CHILES_pipe_startup (see the next bullet for its description).  At this point, if needed, it reads in the SDM file and creates a measurement set (MS).  Online flagging and zero flagging is done when importing the SDM.  If a MS exists, zero flagging is done and the user is reminded that the online flags need to be applied.  If Hanning smoothing is requested by the user, it then smooths the data.  If Hanning smoothing is requested by the user, it then smooths the data.  It then runs "listobs" to produce a listing that describes the entire data set.  The code then automatically identifies all the spws, fields observed, observing intents, and number of antennas.  The integration time is hardcoded in this section as it remains at 8s for all CHILES observations.  The CASA version of the AIPS task PRTAN is run to help the user select a reference antenna.  The code then does all flagging that does not require user input (or doesn't need to be repeated later).  This includes flagging antennas identified as bad by the user, flagging the continuum spws, those data that are exactly zero, and shadowed data.  The data is then quacked and all flags are applied and saved.  The script concludes by producing a webpage (initial.html) that has the logs, the PRTAN output, and a link to the EVLA pipeline weblogs.  This script is based on the initial code from Ximena's bandpass script as well as the initial data processing in the EVLA pipeline. 

	•	CHILES_pipe_startup.py: This script is designed to setup the pipeline as it begins.  It takes user input for the name of the SDM file.  If a MS has already been created, it will identify that file and skip creating a new MS file.  It will ask the user to identify any bad antennas that should be flagged in all the data, and it will ask the user to identify a reference antenna; a list of antennas can be provided.  If the user does not know which antenna should be a reference antenna, this step can be skipped and the user will be prompted again later in the pipeline.  The user can provide a ranked list of reference antennas so that if the primary antenna is flagged, the pipeline will select the next listed antenna as a reference.  Otherwise, the CASA code has its own algorithm for identifying alternate reference antennas that may not be optimal for our purposes.  Most of this script comes from the EVLA_pipe_startup.py script. 

	•	CHILES_pipe_bandpass.py: This script starts by removing any past calibration tables (including results from past 'setjy' runs using 'delmod') and defining variables containing the spectral windows and channels to be used for the calibration.  The main body of the script then runs 'setjy' for 3C286.  In CASA 4.4, usescratch=True must be set otherwise phase jumps are introduced into the data.  Unfortunately, this increases the size of the MS.  Calibration tables for the gain curves and the antenna positions are created with gencal.  Then the initial gain (phases only) and delay calibrations are done to be used for the initial bandpass calibration. The bandpass (BP) calibration is done with fillgaps=0 so no interpolation.  These calibrations are then applied (using default linear interpolation in time, frequency) before flagdata is run twice, once with mode='rflag' and then with mode='extend' using fixed parameters.  Versions previous to v0.8 had left extendflags unset resulting in two extends happening; extendflags=False is now explicitly set.  Also, extendpols=False is explicitly set for RFLAG+Extend.  At this point, the initial gain (phase only) and delay calibrations are repeated before a final bandpass calibration is done.  To assist with removing RFI from the calibration data, we also set a uvrange='>1500m' to exclude the worst RFI on short baselines and the minimum number of baselines for a solution is set to 8.  The calibration is then applied to 3C286 and the amplitude vs. phase is plotted for the fluxcalibrator before it is imaged and the beamsize, peak flux, and rms are measured.  The results are plotted up and embedded into a webpage (bandpass.html) for the user to examine.  Most of this script is based on the code written by Ximena to test bandpass calibration techniques.  If the bandpass solutions are not good enough, the user can manually flag the 3C286 data and re-run this module. 

	•	CHILES_pipe_phasecal.py: The script begins by removing old calibration tables and old images of the phase calibrator (if the task was previously run).  The same uvrange and minimum number of baselines needed for a solution from the bandpass module are used here as well. The first stage is to do a full complex gain (amplitude and phases) for both 3C286 and the phase calibrator (J0943-0819).  The solution interval is chosen to be the scan length to maximize signal-to-noise.  The flux scaling is then done using the code from the EVLA_pipe_fluxboot script boot-strapping the flux scale from 3C286 to J0943.  All of the final calibrations (antpos, gain_curves, delay, bandpass) and the initial gain and bootstrapping solutions are applied and flagdata is run twice with fixed parameters: once with rflag and once with extend.  Versions previous to v0.8 had left extendflags unset resulting in two extends happening; extendflags=False is now explicitly set.  Also, extendpols=False is explicitly set for RFLAG+Extend.  The complex gain and boot-strapped fluxes are then re-derived after the flagging to produce the final solutions, which are applied to both calibrators.  Delmod is run (on field='0') before the second 'setjy' and after the final applycal is run to avoid 'setjy' appending values to the existing models.  The same calibration plots as in bandpass are generated and put on a webpage (phasecal.html) for the user to inspect.  If the calibrations are not sufficiently good, the user can manually flag J0943 and re-run these calibrations.  There should be no need to flag 3C286 again. 

	•	CHILES_pipe_target.py: The last module is extremely simple. It runs an applycal for the deepfield and then it runs flagdata with rflag using the fixed parameters determined by Ximena and Emmanuel to do a final automated flagging of the data.  We explicitly set extendpols=False for RFLAG.  The target data is then split off to form a continuum image, which is imaged and the beamsize, peak flux, and rms is measured for every spectral window.  The results are presented on another webpage (target.html) for perusal.  At this point, the user should be able to go in and manually flag the target knowing that the calibration is good.  This task does not need to be re-run. 
	
For version 0.9 a bunch of flagdata commands with mode='summary' have been added after every RFLAG (and extend) and after every applycal in order to better understand the flagging statistics.  This is for test purposes only and they will be commented out in later versions.

In version 0.11 these "summary" flagdata commands have been limited to one per module with only the "initial" one being run on all sources with subsequent runs only looking at the flux calibrator, phase calibrator, or target (respectively).  The applycal for the target was also moved from the phasecal module to the target module.  Finally, the initial module checks that zero flags have been applied and reminds the user that online flags are assumed to have been applied already if a MS exists.  (2/9/16 DJP)

To run this code locally (or in Socorro), the path to the pipeline and to the weblogs from the NRAO pipeline have to be added to (or uncommented) in the CHILES_pipeline_initial.py module.

